# The Story

## Hertic and Blasphpemor!  How dare you!

They need no introduction, the haters.  Starting with their glass half empty.  The elephant in the room.  Its unfatomable, its unprovable, its illogical, the word of god can't change, whatever your reason.  I ask you to just move on.  I don't want to fight with you and neither does anyone in our community.  If you don't believe in what is being done, that is fine.  I assure you we aren't aborting any babies or doing any human sacrifices to make things happen.  Go touch grass and play some pickleball at church and forget that this exist.  If I am a heretic, I will join a long line of authors that converted the Bible from hebrew and greek into English.  Here is a comprehensive, comma-separated list of authors, scholars, and committees who translated the Bible into English from the original Hebrew and Greek texts, or who produced significant alternate versions and revisions:

William Tyndale, Miles Coverdale, John Rogers, Thomas Matthew, Richard Taverner, the Geneva Bible translators (William Whittingham, Anthony Gilby, Thomas Sampson, Christopher Goodman, John Knox), the Bishops’ Bible revisers (Matthew Parker, Edmund Grindal, James Pilkington, Richard Cox, Edmund Guest, Robert Horne, John Jewel, William Alley, Thomas Bentham, John Scory, John Parkhurst, Edmund Sandys, Nicholas Bullingham, William Cole, William Bradbridge, John Best, Thomas Cooper, Richard Cheyney, John Aylmer, John Young, Richard Davies, Morgan Phillips, Hugh Curwen, Thomas Thirlby, John White, Gilbert Bourne, James Turberville, Henry Cole, Nicholas Harpsfield, John Story, Thomas Martin, John Warner, John Christopherson, John White, Robert Chichester, John Holyman, Thomas Goldwell, William Rugg, John Hopton, John Harpsfield, Nicholas Wotton, Owen Oglethorpe, John Boxall, John Stokesley, Cuthbert Tunstall, John Clerk, John Bell, William Barlow, John Capon, John Salcot, John Scory, Thomas Thirlby, Nicholas Heath, Stephen Gardiner, Edmund Bonner, John White, John Hooper, Robert Ferrar, John Taylor, John Ponet, John Scory, John Harley, John Hooper, Robert Ferrar, John Taylor, John Ponet, John Scory, John Harley), the King James Version translators (Lancelot Andrewes, John Overall, Hadrian à Saravia, Richard Clarke, John Layfield, Robert Tighe, Francis Burleigh, Geoffrey King, Richard Thomson, William Bedwell, Edward Lively, John Richardson, Lawrence Chadderton, William Charke, William Gataker, John Harding, John Perne, Thomas Spence, Richard Brett, Thomas Harrison, John Boys, William Branthwaite, Andrew Downes, John Duport, George Abbot, Thomas Ravis, Thomas Holland, John Rainolds, Thomas Sparke, John Aglionby, John Layfield, William Fairclough, John Harmer, Thomas Bilson, Miles Smith, Richard Bancroft, John Overall, Lancelot Andrewes, John Spenser, Roger Fenton, Andrew Perne, William Barlow, Thomas Morton, John King, Anthony Rudd, Thomas Dove, John Buckeridge, John Overall, Lancelot Andrewes, John Spenser, Roger Fenton, Andrew Perne, William Barlow, Thomas Morton, John King, Anthony Rudd, Thomas Dove, John Buckeridge), the Douay-Rheims translators (Gregory Martin, William Allen, Richard Bristow, Thomas Worthington, John Reynolds, William Fulke), John Wycliffe (from Latin Vulgate, not Hebrew/Greek), John Purvey, Nicholas Hereford, John Trevisa, William Tyndale, Miles Coverdale, John Rogers, Richard Taverner, the Geneva Bible team, the Bishops’ Bible team, the King James Version team, the Douay-Rheims team, John Bois, Thomas Ward, John Downe, William Fulke, Laurence Humphrey, Thomas Cooper, John Foxe, John Bale, Robert Crowley, William Whittingham, Anthony Gilby, Thomas Sampson, Christopher Goodman, John Knox, Edmund Grindal, James Pilkington, Richard Cox, Edmund Guest, Robert Horne, John Jewel, William Alley, Thomas Bentham, John Scory, John Parkhurst, Edmund Sandys, Nicholas Bullingham, William Cole, William Bradbridge, John Best, Thomas Cooper, Richard Cheyney, John Aylmer, John Young, Richard Davies, Morgan Phillips, Hugh Curwen, Thomas Thirlby, John White, Gilbert Bourne, James Turberville, Henry Cole, Nicholas Harpsfield, John Story, Thomas Martin, John Warner, John Christopherson, John White, Robert Chichester, John Holyman, Thomas Goldwell, William Rugg, John Hopton, John Harpsfield, Nicholas Wotton, Owen Oglethorpe, John Boxall, John Stokesley, Cuthbert Tunstall, John Clerk, John Bell, William Barlow, John Capon, John Salcot, John Scory, Thomas Thirlby, Nicholas Heath, Stephen Gardiner, Edmund Bonner, John White, John Hooper, Robert Ferrar, John Taylor, John Ponet, John Scory, John Harley, John Hooper, Robert Ferrar, John Taylor, John Ponet, John Scory, John Harley, John Bois, Thomas Ward, John Downe, William Fulke, Laurence Humphrey, Thomas Cooper, John Foxe, John Bale, Robert Crowley, William Whittingham, Anthony Gilby, Thomas Sampson, Christopher Goodman, John Knox, Edmund Grindal, James Pilkington, Richard Cox, Edmund Guest, Robert Horne, John Jewel, William Alley, Thomas Bentham, John Scory, John Parkhurst, Edmund Sandys, Nicholas Bullingham, William Cole, William Bradbridge, John Best, Thomas Cooper, Richard Cheyney, John Aylmer, John Young, Richard Davies, Morgan Phillips, Hugh Curwen, Thomas Thirlby, John White, Gilbert Bourne, James Turberville, Henry Cole, Nicholas Harpsfield, John Story, Thomas Martin, John Warner, John Christopherson, John White, Robert Chichester, John Holyman, Thomas Goldwell, William Rugg, John Hopton, John Harpsfield, Nicholas Wotton, Owen Oglethorpe, John Boxall, John Stokesley, Cuthbert Tunstall, John Clerk, John Bell, William Barlow, John Capon, John Salcot, John Scory, Thomas Thirlby, Nicholas Heath, Stephen Gardiner, Edmund Bonner, John White, John Hooper, Robert Ferrar, John Taylor, John Ponet, John Scory, John Harley, John Hooper, Robert Ferrar, John Taylor, John Ponet, John Scory, John Harley, John Bois, Thomas Ward, John Downe, William Fulke, Laurence Humphrey, Thomas Cooper, John Foxe, John Bale, Robert Crowley, Noah Webster, Ronald Knox, Gerrit Verkuyl, Angelo Traina, Kenneth N. Taylor, Stephen T. Byington, Jay P. Green, Heinz Cassirer, David H. Stern, Michael Engelbrite, Eugene H. Peterson, David Bauscher, J.B. Phillips, William B. Godbey, Ferrar Fenton, Richard Francis Weymouth, Ernest Hampden-Cook, Robert Aitken, Jane Aitken, Isaac Collins, Isaiah Thomas.

## Overview

Nelson Mandela died on December 5, 2013, at the age of 95.  Millions of people across the world morned at the death of Nelson Mandela.  The weird thing is, many of us remember watching him die several years earlier when we saw the broadcast.  Most of just let it go as a misremembering of the event.  Even dwelling on it a little our brains told us, maybe it was someone else or deja vu, whatever.  However, some people, would not let it go in one ear and out the other.  Post started popping up around the internet, and before we knew it, there was an exhaustive list of mandela effected items.  Chief among them, the King James Bible and other religious text.  Many devout christians had discovered that bible which they had read had now been altered to a degree where it made the savior appear as a murderer.  

In red letters was quoted.  Luke 19:27 - "But those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me."  Some bitter naysayers would argue that this was cannon and all the other bible changes were folklore or attributed to the common book of prayer.  While that may be true for some, it did not hold true throughout the entire KJV bible.  A bible that was written in perfect Early Modern English.  Most people believed before Nelson Mandela died that it was so perfect of a translation that it only contained 3 errors.  This bible was even used to teach most people English, prior to mass printing as it was the only available book that was widely available to commoners.  However now, the item that was treasured was barely legable and contained massive grammar fails, incorrect articles, and improper inflections.  Gone were the consistent word choices throughout.  Mythical beast like unicorns now roamed the bible.  A word that only a viking would use.

## Why Use AI?  Isn't AI Evil?

While some future form of AI might take over the universe.  I don't believe any current version of AI is good or bad or capable of achieving AGI.  I do believe recrusive self improvement is possible.  AGI without living cells or a spirit is probably unattainable.  I have been using AI for years and don't believe in any way that their is any devils or demons in the creation of it.  AI is very flawed to those of us that know it and its uses.  It is basically a large tree of every possible decision anyone could ever make.  They say a petabyte is all the knowledge one human can create in a lifetime.  The worlds leading super computer operates at 4.5 petabytes per minute as of the writing of this.  These LLM's bake for months and then receive weights and are trained to do very specific things.  I believe AGI will be unatainable until they begin to integrate brain cells, which is possible now but has yet to be done.  For now, I see it as a tool that can help fix the KJV by identifing outliers.  Also, AI has not been given free reign over the project, it simply acts as an assistant.

## Methodolgy Formula

Memory + Residue + Period Attestation + Word Usage Count + Early Modern English Grammar + Holy Spirit = Corrected Verse

I have updated my decision formula several times since the start of the project to reflect on whether a verse is correct or it should be changed.  I believe these 6 pillars attest to the correct verse of the King James.

## The word black list and the word white list

I have created two seperate list, a rare word white list, and a rare word black list.  The reason for the creation of these is to track words removed and words that should never be removed.  

The idea behind removing words is because they don't fit with the formula.  The word was too rare or it was mispelled.  Other versions of the bible use a more simplified approach to the rare word.  Ie. Buriers -> Ones who bury.  Coppersmith -> smith.

The white list ususally contains authentic names, places, and objects.  These can include herbs, animals, or plants that geniunely are used rarely.  This can also include words from famous verses that should not be changed.

I also created a list of famous verses and how different the output of this project are compared to the original King James.  This allows for anyone to easily check the difference and find mistakes or corrections needed.

[Black List](./references/word_blacklist.md) | 
[White Liist](./references/word_whitelist.md) | 
[Famous Verses](./references/verses_famous.md)

## The Beginning

### Week 1
I gathered every resource I could find.  Bibles of every translation, the lexicon, and Strong's concordance.  I gathered all blogs and video resources I could find relating to bible changes and the mandela effect.  I then imported all memories of what the bible had and my own.  I imported everything from two projects that already attempted to correct or show differences in the KJV and mandela effect.  I imported all memories and residuals from KJVrestore and thesupernaturalbiblechanges. I then image scanned all residuals and got a text version.  Every resource found and added to the /references folder of this project.

I then started with all memories as a base for changes and created an MVP export of the KJV and memories.  I then created an AI agent that kept early modern english text in memory as well as alternateve versions of the bible to allow it to advise on decisions early on.  I then searched for outliers, words that didn't belong in the KJV, and words with improper inflection.  One of the tell tale signs that the mandela effect has altered all existing bibles is that it now contains mixed inflections for both new English and Early Modern English.  The current English inflections simply do not belong in something written in 1611.

[First pass outliers](./references/uncleared_words.md) | 
[Inflection in Early Modern English vs Current New English](./references/Inflection_English_vs_Early_Modern_English.md) | 
[Mixed Inflections with decisions made](./references/mixed_inflections.md)

I found all cases of mixed inflection and standardized them across the entire bible.  For better or worse, it is a start.  I found all the rare words that only occured 1-2 times and subtracted the proper names and locations of bible events.  This resulted in roughly 600 words that needed to be corrected on around 2000 verses.  I did not have time to go through each one by hand but I skimmed them and they mostly seemed correct by the AI.  It may not be perfect, but it is a good start.  I used an ocr scanner to scan all the residuals and compare them against existing bibles.  Most of the images were found to come from rephrases, study bibles, or other bible translations.  Only 1-2 images were confirmed to be true authentic KJV residuals.  A large portion of the psalms among them.  I exported everything to a MVP copy of the bible.  I collapsed all name variants into their modern usage, excluding Sampson which differes from the author Samson of the new testant. 

[OCR Scans of Residuals](./references/residuals_ocr.md) | 
[OCR Proposals & Adoptions 1](./references/residue_verse_proposals_1.md) | 
[OCR Proposals & Adoptions 2](./references/residue_verse_proposals_2.md) | 
[Name Variants](./references/name_variants.md)

I also made a 2nd pass over the words to try to get even more rare words removed and words from the first pass that were replaced with other rare words.  This batch took much longer and i needed to remove inflections and white list words from the first batch.  It took longer cause nearly every translation of the bible was added including the geneva which was before the king james.

[Round 2 of Rare Words](./references/rare_words_restored.md)
[Round 2 AI Suggestions](./references/rare_word_witness_batches_2/round2_ai_suggestions.md)
[Round 2 AI Whitelist Suggestions](./references/rare_word_witness_batches_2/round2_whitelist_and_no_safe_swap.md)

### Week 2

With all the data known about the mandela effect incorporated into the current exports, I now need to go over it and fix any damage.  Meditate on the new word, and see if anything needs to be changed.  Probably create a blog to let people know about the changes.  I also created a round 3 of rare words to review.  Many of which seem to be authentic KJV.  The time of reviewing outliers seems to be coming to a close.

[Round 3 of rare words](./references/rare_word_round3_review.md)